
I've collected a lot of random thoughts and notes about writing over the last few months, which I've been meaning to turn into a full-sized post. Today I realized it'll never fit on a single post, so I'll just do it as a series.


Let's start with the beginning.

I spent so much time doing things of little value.

If you can read, you can write. It doesn't take a university degree to be able to write. Just do it. Open a notepad and write something.  Will it suck? Definitely, mine did and still does. But over time, it'll suck less. The first sentence is the hardest. Just be patient and keep writing. 

# How to Write in X difficult steps

*Theme/Topic*
Think about what it is a about. The theme is not always clear, sometime we have to through a complete draft and revision to find it out. But without it, there's no post. There must be a central theme, a main strand that binds the post together.

*Humanity*
It's easy to forget about the human on technical writing. The problem is that, without the human element, the writing tends to be too abstract, boring, or dry. So, try to at least speak, albeit tangentially, about the people behind the technology.

There are many vectors to introduce people. You can speak about the inventor or designer of a product. The founder of a company. The history behind its creation. Or any gossip or rumor.

If you can interleave a personal history into your writing, it will pick up a new dimension that will make it stand out among the majority. It's not always easy, or possible, but it's worth keeping it in mind.

*Audience*
Write with the audience in mind. Ask yourself what can you assume that your audience knows. For example, if your readers are developers, you can assume they are familiar with Git. If not, they are thousands of tutorials online.

If you're writing a post on some advanced topic on a language, you can assume that they pretty much have their fundamentals covered.

One of the things I find more offputting is when a writer over explains the basics. It makes reading heavy and drudge. If aren't sure about the level of knowledge in your audience, and you have to cover some rather basic thing, you can structure the post in sections, and let readers know they can skip a topic if they know it.

*Research*
Do your research. Take notes.
You'll begin each post with a healthy dose of research. This includes reading, but sometimes also playing up with things. If you write a tutorial, you want to nail down the process you're about to write in your mind. So you'll go through it several times, taking notes and screenshots.

*Outline*
Structure is everything: outline, paragraph, sentence, figures
The outline is the foundation of the post. To make it, you'll take in account the theme, the research and the audience, and the lenght.

Begin with the macro level, I find that using an outline tool is beneficial. (I use org-mode for this.) I like to put a note to myself with a description of what is covered in each section.

Balance out the relative weight in each section.

Then I write a single sentence per paragraph.

I like to describe each paragraph with a sentence:

    Keyword
    Paragraph

At the end you'll find something like this:

*Write*
Just sit down and write. Imagine you're writing to a 5 year old. There will be time to make writing more complex later. For you, you just need to put thoughs in a paper.

*Edit*
Edit like crazy, spend time.
Here's where most of the time you'll spend. That's ok. More on this later.
When you’re done, wait a day or so and re-read. Discover to your horror that it’s trash and get on editing

*Proofread*
Get another to proofread or do the steps.

*Print it*
For some reason, when words are on paper the eyes pick up more details. Not only I can find mistakes that passed past all editing and proofreading, but I can find better alternatives to words, sentence and paragraph structure.

For a long time, I refused to print, it seemed to me wasteful for paper. But after trying it a few times with small articles, I changed my mind. I had to admit the level of quality it adds is so great that I can't in good conscience not do it. At least for the posts I most care about.

*Revise & publish*
Try not to publish when your tired. You want to get it done at this point. But, please give it another night and send your work first thing in the morning. Make a final read and send it.

# More On Editing

*Tone*
Be serious, but not too serious.
Getting the right tone is part of the editing process. The tone will depend on the audience and the platform you're publishing to. It's also part of your own personality, ligthness is one way you can show your personality. So, in my opinion a little bit of fun is important. But you're not a stand-up comedian, and your readers haven't come to have a laught. They want solid data, shown in a clear and readable way. So balance it out.

*Readability*
Prefer to use less words when possible. Don't fall into the temptation of using fancy words just to show how big your vocabulary is, no one cares. If you want to flex your vocabulary muscles, do it in your own blog, it's there for that.

It is said that Hemingway got a nobel (?) prize using "older, simpler and better words". He also used short sentences.

It's not only about words, its also about structure withing the post and each section. If you fight different ideas in the same paragraph, you're readers will trip.

Using small words, clear and not-too-loong sentencese, coupled with a well-thought structure should increase the redability level.

*We/You/Me and Passive Voice*
This is a matter of preference. But I like using "You" when possible. It creates an instant connection with the reader. Other alternatives are the editorial "We", which I try to avoid because it sounds too wimpy. Or the "We" as you reader and me writer. Don't be afraid to use the "I" from time to time to give advice or tell the reader I'm picking one alterntie over the other. The risk of the "I" is that, if overused, it'll make the post all about you, which again, no one cares.

Of course, some editorial guidelines might force you to use one style over the other, that's all right. One thing that now one will force you is to use passive voice. It's easy to fall into the passive voice trap but it has several problems:
- Wimpy
- Dead

There are places for passive voice, for instance, where no one cares about who did the action...

*Length*
Keep it short as possible. Who has time to read nowadays? When you said what you wanted to said it's time to wrap up and cash out.

*Modernity*
Make it browsable, scaneable. People will scan the document. Almost no one will read it entirely. Make the first paragraph as interesting as possible to capture the attention. Use headers and sections to help the reader find the information they find interesting. Make it clear at the beginning or every paragraph what that paragraph is about.

*Analogies*
Use analogies and examples to illustrate points.

*Visuals*
Lists, figures and tables are your friends, they also look good. Show example codes.
Whimsical, Dia, etc.

*Proofreading Tools*
The human is still the best at proofreading. At the same time, proofreading your own text is almost impossible. You have seen it to many times that you are blind to the errors. Also, you can't sea better alternatives. The best you can do on your own is let it rest for a while and come back fresh.

In a perfect world we would like to get someone else to proofread and validate the content. But, alas, having a dedicated editor is a true blessing.

We have at our disposal a great many tools like: Grammarly, LanguageTool, Hemingway App or Readable. They will do 90% of the work an editor would do, but the 10% rest is what makes your writing stand up from the rest.

This is more of me trying to teach myself be more productive

# How to be Productive

I'd really love to have good advise for you on this section. I'm not yet to the level of productivity I want to be, not even close. I do have some tips though.

*Have Patience*
Writing for any length of time will teach about patience. Writing takes time, edition takes time, proofreading takes time, revisions take time.
You'll learn patience.

*Keep things moving*
shake things up: change environment, move, read, write about other topics, go to the park with a notebook, sometimes even opening a blank notepad windows and just writing works

*A few tips*
schedule alone time for writing, music headphones, dnd phones

work with time windows, don't leave the seat until done, don't keep writing after done.

pick a good format to write in: org, markdown, latex, rst, avoid wysywig/word

# What's next
There you have it, this is the end of my ramblings... for now.